---
layout: post
title:  "Analysis on Swanner Article"
date:   2021-05-04
excerpt: ""
---

In Leandra Swanner’s [article](https://online.ucpress.edu/hsns/article-abstract/47/3/293/105817/Instruments-of-Science-or-Conquest-Neocolonialism?redirectedFrom=fulltext), “Instruments of Science or Conquest? Neocolonialism and Modern American Astronomy,” she explains what neocolonialist science is and why that term is a perfect characterization of the fight that is happening on Maunakea. Swanner argues that science has become an instrument of colonialism and that it should be acknowledged as being so. The gives a great background on the controversy including those involved, the amount of money spent on the project, and the main concerns that the Hawaiians have. She goes in depth into the history of Hawaii and how Maunakea is sacred land and is considered a realm of the gods. She also talks about the potential environmental repercussions that come with building such a large telescope on the site. She has a very powerful quote that she got from one of the Native Hawaiian culture practitioners, where they yelled, “Like snakes you are…to come and desecrate our sacred land…for what? For your greed, to look in the sky? You guys can’t even take care of this place! (Swanner, 295)” This is a shared frustration among those who oppose the telescope. Many of the Hawaiians, as mentioned in previous posts, feel that their rights as Natives have not been protected. This telescope is yet another example of how the government has no regard for the Native culture.

A point that Swanner makes that we haven’t explicitly talked about is the consequences that come with this type of neocolonialist science as it many times brings on controversy. She states, 

 “Although scientists are understandably reluctant to equate their professional activities with cultural annihilation and typically reject such demonizing characterizations, dismissing this unflattering neocolonialist image of modern science has both ethical and practical consequences: Native communities continue to report feeling victimized while scientists’ efforts to expand their research programs suffer social, legal, and economic setbacks. (Swanner, 296)”

This is important to note as I don’t see either side backing down “peacefully.” It’s unlikely that the Hawaiians will give up as this telescope has been described as the “last straw.” I don’t think that TMT will surrender because of all the money they have put into the project and many of them truly don’t think they’re doing anything wrong. They have also said that Maunakea is the best place in the world for this telescope. There really doesn’t seem to be a solution where both parties are happy.
	Swanner also talks a little about the history of astronomy and how previously, they had never felt the need to justify projects to the public as astronomy is seen as a “noble scientific discipline engaged in the pursuit of pure knowledge. (Swanner, 298)” She even explains that astronomers thought that moving the telescope to the sacred mountain would be a “simple” matter. It is all about what they feel is more important. They don’t see the sacred mountain being as important as a telescope. There was a different opinion by the astronomers on Maui, who were surprised by how quickly the telescopes were being built on the mountain because they understood its importance to the Hawaiian culture. 
	
Swanner has a great amount of background information on all aspects of the TMT controversy and concludes that the protesting cannot be dismissed as a one-time surge of opposition or reduced to the hyperbole of science vs. religion. She says “this grassroots anti-observatory campaign epitomizes a larger cultural divide that is historically anchored to the rise of environmental and Native rights movements in the United States as well as competing scientific and spiritual narratives. (Swanner, 316)” She also claims that astronomers’ narratives have not changed over the past few decades and most of their projects do not take Native rights into consideration; they instead only look at the financials and logistics. She explains that astronomers are needing to adapt to the new world where others want a say in what they do. Before, there was no question as to whether their projects were valid, but now they’re needing to justify themselves more than ever. In the case of the telescope, she claims that it is an instrument of power and conquest, and a symbol of cultural genocide linked to a colonialist past (Swanner, 318). She finished with stating that the future of astronomy will depend on astronomer’s acceptance of the “role of colonialism in shaping hierarchical and racialized understandings of Native peoples, nature, and technology. (Swanner, 318)” 

[Main Arguments](https://asokamoto.github.io/407FinalProject/blog/Arguments/)
