---
layout: post
title:  "Science and Astronomy in Hawaii"
date:   2021-05-02
excerpt: "Analysis on Aanchal Saraf's paper"
---
The Disney movie Moana is a heartwarming story about a young princess who teams up with the Hawaiian Demi-god Maui in order to save her home, Motonui, by restoring the heart of Te Fiti, the goddess of creation. In order to do this, she needs to learn how to navigate the ocean using the stars and make her way to Te Fiti’s island. Though animated movies like this are mostly fiction, the creators of Moana had to do some research on the art of wayfinding. Polynesians have been navigating the ocean since 300 A.D., which is how they were able to make their initial migration across the Pacific without modern technology. Celestial navigation, or wayfinding, was once a forgotten tradition, but Polynesians have since revitalized the practice in the creation of the Hokule'a ship. The double-hulled boat is modeled after the original boats that the Polynesians sailed all those years ago. The boat made its way from Hawaii to Tahiti by only use of wayfinding in 1976. Since then, the Hokule'a has made 11 voyages and completed their longest worldwide 6-year trip. 

In Saraf’s [paper](https://escholarship.org/uc/item/70z6w502), “’We’d rather eat rocks’: Contesting the Thirty Meter Telescope in a Struggle over Science and Sovereignty in Hawai’i,” she explains that Western scientists have historicized the Native Hawaiians as ancient astronomers. She says that this would suggest they are stuck in the past and the “expansiveness of their practice is reduced and retrofitted in the service of a colonial narrative. (Saraf, 152)” She thinks that the most concerning part of this is that this reduction implies that this ancient art of wayfinding ends with the invention of Western astronomy. 

Saraf argues that the settlers (those who are not native to Hawaii) who represent the TMT are using a strategy of sovereignty denial that is rooted in “undermining [Native Hawaiian] ontologies and epistemologies. (Saraf, 154)” in their arguments to build the telescope. She says that supporters are calling the Hawaiians “anti-science,” while simultaneously excluding their worldviews from carrying the same weight of intellectual likeness to Western knowledge production. To summarize, Saraf explains that settlers expect the Native Hawaiians to comply with their way of life. They expect a certain amount of predictability from the Natives that when they don’t act in an expected way, they categorize it as opposition. In this case, the Native Hawaiians claiming the land as sacred and protesting the construction forces the settlers to perceive this behavior as anti-scientific primitivism.
	
This is a trend we see in science when we compare “western” vs. “traditional.” Earlier in the term, we read an [article](https://www.journals.uchicago.edu/doi/abs/10.1086/521156) by Fa-ti Fan, “Redrawing the Map.” There was a similar concept in this paper where Fan talks about how these binaries (such as western vs. traditional) can be detrimental to the overall view of a country’s science. Much of China’s science has been labeled “traditional,” which many times will translate to being unreliable or not as reliable as “western” science. This is not the case and that can be seen here in the Hawaiian culture’s astronomy. There is valid science behind wayfinding, and it works, but because it wasn’t created by a “western” power, it is dismissed as inaccurate. This is a problem that has been occurring across all non-western science and has its roots in colonialism and neocolonialism.  


[Colonialism and Neocolonialism in Hawaii](https://asokamoto.github.io/407FinalProject/blog/Neocolonialism/)

