---
layout: post
title:  "Neocolonialism and Colonialism in Hawaii"
date:   2021-05-03
excerpt: "Background information on colonialism and neocolonilism in Hawaii"
image: "/images/pic02.jpg"
---
Going forward, it is important that we have a general understanding of colonialism, neocolonialism and its effects on Hawaii. 
Colonialism is described as “the deliberate imposition of the rules and policies of a nation on another nation. (Fieser, Dowden)” This is used as a way to exploit the colonized nation to facilitate economic development in the home state. The main concept of colonialism is that with rule over another country or region, the conqueror’s country will benefit from the exploitation of the conquered resources. When a state is conquered, their economic, political, social and sometimes intellectual structure is altered due to the influence of the conqueror. “Neocolonialism” is a term that describes the actions and effects that are left from the days of the colonial era in a society (Fieser, Dowden). Though we aren’t seeing as much colonialism in the 21st century, we are seeing the remanence of the colonial era as neocolonialism.

Not many are taught about the annexation of Hawaii and are surprised to find that it was an illegal act. At the time, the head of the Kingdom of Hawaii was Queen Lili`uokalani. In 1893, she was overthrown by American businessmen and placed under house arrest for months. This was in efforts to get better military position for the United States. Below is a video by PBS Hawaii on the injustice she faced as Queen that should be watched as it gives background information on the illegal overthrow of the Hawaiian government. When royalists tried to restore the Queen’s position as queen, she was arrested and put on trial. She was convicted and sentenced to five years in prison at hard labor, and fined $5,000. This was eventually reduced to house arrest in a room at Iolani Palace for eight months. More can be learned at the Iolani Palace website (https://www.iolanipalace.org/history/queens-imprisonment/).

Some argue that Hawaii is still being illegally occupied by the United States as the annexation was done was unlawfully and as an aggressive act of war. After the overthrow, the teaching of the Hawaiian language was banned and those who spoke it in school, were punished (Sang). This would continue for the next four generations. This was in efforts to silence the Hawaiian culture and move toward more “western” culture and traditions. 

To this day, Hawai’i is seen as a tourist destination and those who visit usually have no knowledge of its history. It’s a touchy subject as there were many consequences from this era. This is an important concept to understand before going into the TMT controversy as many arguments from the Native Hawaiians are based on the lack of respect that outsiders have for the native culture. If you ask around in Hawaii, the local people often despise tourists, “haole” as they call them. This is not only because they have little respect for the land, but they also have no knowledge of what conspired in history. 

An example of this lack of respect for the land, there is currently a big controversy surrounding Mark Zuckerberg’s Hawaii estate as he is attempting to purchase protected land around his already large $100 million Kauai property. The protected land are Hawaiian land parcels which are reserved for the natives. Mr. Zuckerberg is trying to take that land from the native Hawaiians, which seems to be a trend in Hawaiian history. It is events like these that show us that neocolonialism is still present today.

