---
layout: post
title:  "Kenedis Q&A"
date:   2021-05-29
excerpt: "Question and Answer with Kenedi Lopes"
image: "/images/ken.jpg"
---

My full name is Kenedi Veronica Kapua’enamaikalani Lopes. I am 25% Native Hawaiian ancestry, while the other 75% is comprised of Filipino and Caucasian descent. I graduated from Saint Mary’s College of California with a major in English, and played Division 1 softball for the school. My plan post-undergraduate is to attend UH Manoa’s William Richardson School of Law.

1.	Living in Hawaii, did you feel any sort of bias against Hawaiians in your own life?

Growing up in Hawaii, I was exposed to so many different groups of people. Essentially, this place is a mixing pot of cultures and ethnicities, so it was really nice seeing both familiar and different faces all throughout the islands. Tourists would often disparage my way of speaking pidgin, and that I was the foreigner in my own land. I didn’t speak proper, I didn’t speak as they did, therefore I was incapable and stupid. Inevitably, this made me feel small and contributed to my ill perception of tourists and mainlanders alike.

2.	Can you give a little background on your childhood and growing up with the Hawaiian culture?

I am comprised of 25% Hawaiian ancestry and for me that quarter percentage is something I value the most, especially when I live on the campus of the only Native Hawaiian boarding school to exist. My mom is a dorm advisor at Kamehameha Schools, so I’ve grown up surrounded by Hawaiian students and mentors all my life. While here, I’ve been exposed to all kinds of cultural traditions—Makahiki games, Hawaiian mele, Kamehameha song contest, imu, hula, etc. While I am not at all fluent in the language, we practice it in our household quite regularly. Being surrounded by the Hawaiian culture has played a significant role in my perception of the world, as I’m keener on empathy and compassion. But due to our history with colonialism, us Hawaiians also keep our guard raised. In celebrating my heritage, it gives me a sense of identity and belonging, so when any part of my culture is uprooted, I feel it is my Kuleana to ensure that it is restored. My parents, aunties, uncles, and grandparents instill within me an appreciation for knowing where we’ve come from and encourage me to know where we need to be going.

3.	The thing about TMT that frustrates you the most?

There are so many things that frustrate me when it comes to the dispute on Mauna Kea, but perhaps what is most appalling is that this narrative has been told too many times. This sacred mountain is the birthplace of our Hawaiian culture, an essential part of what makes Hawaiians, Hawaiians. It’s the equivalent to America’s Rushmore or the Bible’s Garden of Eden. For our government to willingly give away the most important and valued piece of land to science without considering how it contributes to the desecration of our culture is ridiculous and infuriating. And it’s all for profit. What it boils down to isn’t science vs. Hawaiians, but a fight for doing the right thing. The Kanaka will not back down from this battle because Mauna Kea is the last thing we have left. We’ve already lost Waikiki to tourism and our once sovereign nation to America, but we are not going to lose our place of birth. You can build a telescope elsewhere.

4.	Thoughts on the mistreatment of Native peoples and do you think there are enough laws out there to protect them in their homelands? — If no, what sorts of things would you like to see protected? 

As I mentioned above, this tale is the oldest story in the book. We’re not the only indigenous group fighting the same fight. And the fact that we even have to think about creating laws to protect homelands because people are too greedy is unfathomable. There are sanctions in place to ensure that Native Hawaiians have a share of the land, like the Hawaiian Homesteads. However, it’s still controlled by the government and some Kupuna pass without ever seeing their chance at obtaining the land that was always theirs to begin with. So, I guess, no, there aren’t enough “laws” in place. But ultimately, any law or otherwise that is put in place always has a loophole. And the government will always find that loophole, so what good will any law do for indigenous peoples?



